Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Cole Moore. Thank you, everybody, for listening. And if you are new here, please consider subscribing if you like what you hear. And if you're not new here and you like what you're hearing still, then you want to support the podcast. A nice rating or review wherever you listen to podcasts is great. If you would like to toss us a couple bucks, we keep the lights on with your donations. That's at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And if you have any coaching or consultation inquiries, please reach out to me directly at empiricalcycling at gmail.com.
And if you would like to hire us as...
for coaching for next year. I really want to emphasize that you reach out sooner than later because we usually get a large volume of inquiries in September, October-ish. And so if you are thinking about getting in touch with us, please do so soon before all of that happens so that way we can make sure that you get in with the right coach and that everything's not a rushed process. We don't rush things anyway, but occasionally when there's a whole bunch of stuff, we will have to delay people a couple weeks.
as we try to give everybody the time and attention that they need. So if you would like to consult with us too, we can review your season, we can talk about next season, we can talk about what went right and what went wrong, we can review your files, we'll answer all your questions, give you the tools to help you get faster for next year without a coach, just on your own. And so yeah, again, empiricalcycling at gmodel.com.
And, oh, one more thing. If you are a student or professional athlete, we coach quite a few students and pros. And we know that you don't have the world's biggest budget, so we are very negotiable on our rates. And if you would like to work with us...
Please reach out and we will negotiate a rate. We're not going to cut our services or anything like that. I don't think people need to make a ton of money in order to get good coaching. So please reach out about that and we are happy to work with you. And if you have any questions for future podcasts, please follow me on Instagram at Empirical Cycling because that's where up in the stories I'm going to ask for questions for the podcasts. I've also gotten into a habit the last couple of years of doing a weekend AMA.
So go follow along for all of that. We just wrap that up, and every weekend we get some really interesting and really cool questions sometimes, and I really like hearing what everybody's thinking. So thanks for all of your interesting questions for all of that. And now getting into our normal topic for today. So this podcast, I know it looks a little clickbaity, I'm sorry about that, but I actually thought it would be interesting for Rory's first appearance on the podcast to discuss...
some stuff because, well, what you're going to hear in the podcast, so Rory's one of our coaches. He's been with us for a couple months as a coach, but he has also worked with us as an athlete previously, and you're going to hear more about that anyway, but Rory is particularly, one of his strengths as a coach is understanding motivation and what holds people back and all that kind of stuff. He's a really, really excellent coach. I mean, obviously, these are some of the reasons that I brought him on as a coach.
But he's great at this kind of stuff. And I thought that he would be exactly the right person to talk to about the kind of things that hold people's fitness back. Why does it stagnate? What's going on? And a lot of the time, some people don't even realize that they're doing or not doing something that is holding them back. So that's some of the big stuff that we've seen is in this episode. And I also need to make a disclaimer on all of this stuff.
We're trying not to talk down to anybody about all of this stuff. This is just what we see and what we find works in our experience as coaches and athletes. Because if what you're doing is working and what's on this list is something that you're doing and we're suggesting that you don't, but it's working for you, just keep doing it. All I want is for people to get faster. And if what you're doing is making you faster, then by all means, please keep doing it. Don't let us throw you off your guard.
So that's the big disclaimer. If you're doing what you like and it's working, keep going. And if you are wondering why something's not working, potentially we've got something that might be not working for you. And we're going to also discuss ways to adjust and fix that kind of stuff for yourself as an athlete. So that's kind of what we're doing today. But one more other thing before we get into it. We also punted a little bit on what...
he and I thought were really obvious things. We punted on nutrition and sleep because those are for especially intermediate athletes and most people listening to this podcast are intermediate or fairly well-trained advanced athletes. And so that's the kind of stuff that if you are wondering if yours is dialed in, then you can also reach out to me and I will recommend some nutritionists for you to talk to. We do not have
Any nutritionists or dieticians in-house, but we know some really excellent ones, including Namrita, who's been on the podcast a couple times. So we can refer you to her or somebody else. And yeah, so that's the kind of stuff that we kind of went, oh, yeah, that's too obvious. We didn't want to spend a terrible amount of time on it, because a lot of the stuff that we're going to talk about today is kind of...
Training Related or Off-Bike Related. And so I don't want to scoop us on all of this stuff. But anyway, so Rory is one of the coaches who has some open slots, by the way, if you'd like to work with him, please again, reach out. So anyway, without further ado, let's get into the podcast and I'll see you on the other side. All right, Rory, thanks for coming on to the podcast. I appreciate you coming on. You are, of course, one of our empirical cycling coaches. So why don't you tell us a bit about your history with empirical cycling and how you got to where you are now?
Oh, so we're just going to pretend this is the first time we're doing it. Yeah, the... Okay, so for listeners, we had a horrible technical glitch the first time, and I sounded like I was in a tin can, and that was unacceptable. Normally, I'm able to salvage that audio quality, and this time, it was so bad, I couldn't. I think it's that I'm on a different laptop, because the other laptop sounded like I was... Well, it was even unintelligible. So, yeah, it went for this laptop mic, and...
was just horrible. I couldn't in good conscience release it. So yes, we are doing this a second time. So thanks, Rory, for even more of your time. But yeah, we're going to still talk about the same stuff. The subject matter has not changed. So again, let's go for your story again. Yeah. And the other advantage of us re-recording this is that I've got all the things that I thought about after the podcast that would have made me sound even smarter.
And the downside is that I've forgotten them all, but maybe one of them will come out. Yeah, so I've been coaching since like 2016, 2017, something like that. Usual story, I think, from most coaches, where it's initially, you know, people you ride with a lot that recognize you, maybe understand a little bit on how to go faster. Back then, I knew remarkably little. And ever since then, I've gotten a bit better at it. It's sort of like...
The moment where it all clicked into place was actually doing Coley's FTP test for the very first time. And it's that realization of, oh, no, actually, this is all actually really easy to do. It shouldn't feel hard every time you go out and do a workout, and especially not when you're not doing a workout. So I kind of built on that, realized how to coach myself at first, then gradually.
One person eventually decided to pay me for my time, and that was the realization that, oh, I should just keep doing this. And then Coley decided he wanted to pay me for doing it at the start of this year, and that's been great, because the best part about coaching is getting to live vicariously through other people, and the worst part is the business side, which fortunately Coley does for me.
You know, that's been a learning process too, me doing the business stuff. But yeah, that's, and also you have worked with Fabiano. Yeah. So we'll probably get into this a wee bit when we start talking about the real point of this podcast. My major struggles as a self-coach athlete was always about being able to drive myself to actually do it.
I've joked with my partner that if I take a day off, I need to make sure I ride the next day, because if I don't ride the next day, I'll be off the bike for a week. I just need that constant, you know, the good hormones need to be there at all times, basically. So I worked with Fabiano from around 2021, I think, and he was great. Fabiano was really good at just making sure that...
you know you are happy and enjoying the training that you need to do and if you do start to like struggle with any sort of consistency or struggle with particular workouts etc the focus just becomes let's get back to enjoying riding the bike because ultimately like that's why we do it and I'm happy to say that it had a major impact on me being able to get get back to a bit of the fitness that I used to have.
I've since stopped working with Fabiano, largely because the UK government decided to destroy our economy, and I couldn't afford it for a time, but I took a lot of the principles that I learned from Fabiano into my own job as a coach, but also coaching myself, and we'll talk a wee bit about what some of that is, because that's kind of one of the points we're going to hit later, I think.
Yeah, so let's just get right into it, since you've decided to give us such a nice segue. So our premise coming into this was we are each going to write down five things. I've actually got about eight or nine. Ten, because I have a zero and a zero A when I kept making additions.
And it's going to be all the reasons fitness stagnates or plateaus and what you can do about it. So you've already kind of touched on one. So why don't you go first and let's just start expanding and digging into this. Yeah, well, when we first recorded that, this was actually my last one, because I think it's like, it's a nice summation of a lot of what we're going to talk about today.
When you hit a fitness plateau, sometimes it's just because you haven't been able to stick to whatever plan it is that you actually have, and I think the perception a lot of athletes will end up having, and I think unfortunately a lot of coaches as well, is that that's a bad thing, when I don't think it really needs to be a bad thing, it just needs to be a recognition that it's something that's happened, and there needs to be...
If you're a self-coached athlete, you need to have a look at your training and think, why is it that I haven't been able to stick to this plan? There can be 347 different reasons as to why that could be the case. But sometimes it's just that you're not the sort of person that's able to stick to something really, really rigid. And I think it's very important that people consider how much.
Rigid Structure actually suits them and their life. Yeah. Actually, you know, what's interesting is that when people reach out for coaching and bike life balance and enjoyment and making sure that kind of stuff is a main factor in their training, you and Fabiano are actually the first two people I think about because you two both, because, you know, because I can see in your training peaks and all that stuff because you're my assistant coaches,
you are both so excellent at maintaining that kind of perspective on people and I think partly it's because you've both been through it a bit yourselves but yeah it's like and actually that's such a difference with you and my typical clientele because my clients are usually extremely motivated and I'm more trying to keep them
off the bike more often than I am trying to get them on the bike and enjoying it. Like, they're so motivated. And it's not everybody, obviously, but that's a large part of my clientele. And it's also, you know, that's also why when people come for coaching inquiries and they say, you know, I need help managing this and keeping it fun. And I'm usually like, I am the last person you want to work with. Yeah, like I had an intro call with someone for the first time yesterday.
and one of the reasons he said he thought he needed coaching is he just needed someone to keep him consistent and like that's exactly what I needed from Fabiano when he coached me was someone to just put workouts in so that I went and did them like I had just here's what needs to be hit and like from my perspective as a coach like
The great news about working with Fabiano is the plan he put in place was always the plan I would have given for myself. The difference is that I would have never actually gone on it if I wrote it myself. No, it's funny because the number of people I know who have a coach and they're like, well, the coach doesn't know anything I don't. It's like, well, that's not always the point of a coach. And oftentimes it's not because a lot of people understand the right training principles. But a lot of the times the coach, like for me, I'm a lot of the time thinking about,
How Tired Is Somebody? And like versus their, you know, off the charts motivation. And I've got to find the balance between that versus, you know, like, you know, looking at somebody's consistency and being like, well, you haven't been that consistent. And that's one of the things holding you back, et cetera, et cetera. So actually, which gets into one of my other ones. So, you know, we'll go back and forth with this, I guess.
Things I put in here is obviously consistency, but I think I can flip this and say being too consistent, riding too much and riding too hard too often is a big detriment that holds people back because I think, and I've definitely done this, like when I first started coaching myself, I did this so hard. I burned myself out in like probably four or five months.
and I think I took almost an entire year off the bike or at least many, many, many months before I decided to do more than just like commute easy because I was so exhausted because, you know, one workout a week is good. Two hard workouts is better. Three hard workouts is great. Now, if you go four to five, now you're an innovator, you know, and I didn't realize at the time that I was fucking myself up real good.
And I think, at least having gone through that myself, I know how to recognize it in people. I know the signs very well. So when people, as long as people are honest, actually, that's something else where highly motivated people can hold back key pieces of information that a coach would need to determine that they are fatigued. I'm sure you've run into this once in a while. Yeah. So to give listeners an idea of how I...
Approach the Start of a Week for Athletes. Typically, plans are given out week by week, largely because doing it on a week by week basis makes it really easy to adjust and look back at what's been done recently and what can come afterwards. I ask everyone to basically tell me how many hours they've got each day and anything else alongside that, like is there a day that's going to be really bad for intervals? Are you going to be really stressed at work? Are you planning to get drunk?
Anything that could impact my ability to actually help. But one of the things... I've kind of lost my... What did you just say? I was talking about doing too much, and you were, I think, heading...
towards flexibility. I also had mentioned honesty about fatigue and related symptoms. It's the honesty thing. When I'm asking people to put that time in, ideally, they are telling me the minimum amount of time that they think they'll have. Someone can be hyper-enthusiastic about the training they're going to do, and they think they're going to be able to do four hours every single weekday, and then they're going to be able to do eight hours.
Both Days at the Weekend. And the truth of that is that you're probably not, your enthusiasm is probably going to catch up with you in terms of your timekeeping in the rest of your life. Yeah, because that's 36 hours, and if you're working on a 40-hour workweek too, suddenly... Congrats, you've got two jobs. One of them is an attempt at being a pro cyclist. And they can only do that because they have one job. But like...
When I'm building a plan for the week, I'm building according to the minimum time you've got. I'm trying to make sure that you're going to be able to do the work that we think you need to do in that time. And on top of that, if you find that you do have that extra hour or two, some evenings, or whenever you do your rides, you just go and ride a little bit easy at the end of that ride. You can actually make use of that time.
Position as a coach is always to try and make sure that if you're honest about the time you really do definitely have, you're never going to be pressured into having to do more than you actually can. Because I think, you know, ties into what you're saying there in terms of people doing way too much. It can be that you just, you're sticking way too much to a plan that you've given yourself. And that's the reason ultimately.
that you fall off it is because the platen was too much. Yeah, and when I consult with people, that's one of the things that I do is I try to give them, you know, real, not only methodologies of performing workouts that will allow them to progress, but also I try to give people tools to recognize that they are tired and not even, well, partly, well, obviously all the subjective stuff, but more objective stuff.
Like one of the things I talk about a lot of the time in doing like threshold and sweet spot type work is adding time and zone. I've talked about this on the podcast a lot. And I think I've talked about this on the podcast before, but like if you cannot add time and zone, that is always a definite sign of fatigue. And if you can't whittle it down.
to something like, I didn't get enough sleep, I didn't get enough nutrition, which are all the basics, of course, then if you can't do any of that, then obviously, if it's not stress, then suddenly, it's obvious, okay, I am tired from workouts, and I need to give myself some proper recovery. Yeah, this ties into what my second point would be, which is very much overlapping what we've just said, is that you are trying to do too much, and we can eventually, you're never going to be able to make that progress.
Most athletes should cap it at two a week. It gives you basically five days during the week to effectively recover. Don't just think of your recovery as being your recovery rides or days off. Think of it as if you're doing your endurance rides correctly, they can act as a small act of recovery within the rest of the week. Maybe not the seven-hour epic you do at the weekend, but you know.
When you've got two hours the day after you do a long sweet spot workout, that shouldn't be something that keeps you in whatever fatigue hole you might have been from the day before. You should be fresh almost by the end of that sort of easy, easy ride. I think one a week is also very good, especially for people that are either brand new to training or are bad at holding themselves to sensible intensity targeting.
Basically trying to make sure people don't do an excessive amount of hard work. I think I've said this to you before, that I really like to dig into what we define easy and hard as. I would say anything up to FTP should be considered easy work, because it's the sort of thing where it should feel manageable. There's obviously an increase in the intensity as you start to go up towards doing functional threshold power. But when you actually...
Do an FTP Interval at your FTP, is something that is basically, you feel your legs working, you're having to concentrate on it, but your breathing is very much under control, and when you go over that threshold, you feel that the intensity has gone significantly up, even from a small addition in power, which is why, you know,
I break it down to easy and hard above that, because if we want to go hard, we are purposely saying that this is a hard session. I don't want people to think of some of these even longer FTP or sweet spot intervals as being a hard workout, because once you've got your brain calibrated to what these workouts need to be, it shouldn't be the sort of thing that phases you. And I think ultimately...
When we look back at the history of cycling training, like the 20-minute test has a lot to answer for in terms of how people perceive training. Everyone's got the impression that doing an FTP interval is hard because when they go and do an FTP interval, in their head it's, oh, I need to do two 20-minute tests, and that's not what FTP is.
Or the fact that it overestimates. And I would say even the RAM test has even a lot more to answer for than that. And the 1x8 or 2x8 minutes are even worse. Excuse me, I got my record FTP from an 8-minute test. Yeah, me too. It was a full 60 watts over what I could actually do. Mine was about 40. But I think we should clarify, though, that a sweet spot or an FTP day, especially done near time to exhaustion, does count as a hard day.
Yeah, there's a difference in terms of how you should perceive the workout and what it looks like within a plan. So you want two hard days in the sense that you've got two interval days or two workout days, however you want to class them, and the rest is all like recovery, day off, easy endurance. But when you're in the workout, have a think about, does this work out, should it be feeling hard for me to do?
Versus should it be manageable or easy? Sometimes I try to tell people to think about how much you really have to concentrate in an interval. Typically, the harder an interval gets, the more you really have to think about it. Like when you go and do a 30-second max effort, you're...
Concentrating on it, and then like 10 seconds into the effort, you realize you could probably push the pedals just that little bit harder, and it's just from you thinking and forcing your legs to go and actually do it. So there's a nice sort of concentration gradient that goes with workout intensity, which is quite handy. Concentration gradient is a great way to think about it, actually. Not the concentration gradients of chemistry. Not osmolarity, no. No.
I think actually, and this is totally off topic, but I think it's worth a quick mention is, so you're also talking about RPE in terms of absolute intensity, so like the watts scale, but also the difference with RPE intensity in the duration scale, because five minutes of FTP should be like eminently doable unless you are absolutely screwed in your legs.
But, you know, once you get out to the end, like you've done a lot of it, okay, yeah, that gets very, very difficult. And I actually, this goes towards one of my points, which is one of the reasons that people will plateau, is you pick a power target before the workout. So this goes for below threshold and endurance pace and even over threshold. So for instance, here's a good one for VO2max work, is if you pick a power target,
and you think, oh, if I do 4x5 or 5x5 at 105, 110% FTP or whatever it is, somebody like me, I'm going to be nose breathing for most of that. And I can do a lot of that kind of work and I'm going to have no objective way to say, wow, I'm very tired. But if I really push it to max, I'm going to have an objective way to say, I only did two intervals and I could barely pedal for the third. I really need some rest.
And so you don't have, because you've got this like arbitrary kind of pass-fail at this preconceived target. And it may or may not raise your FTP depending on, or your VO2max or anything like that, depending on where you are in training. But it also doesn't give you that much other extra information when you kind of do that. Because, I mean, how many times have you seen posted anywhere?
Am I doing VO2Max work right? This feels really, really, really easy. I've seen that frequently. Also, going below FTP or even at FTP, if your FTP isn't set right, that one's pretty obvious, but if you're going to do an endurance ride and you're on low volume, let's say you're doing six hours a week, if your endurance target is a little too high, it's not going to cost you that much.
But it'll start to cost you maybe after a couple months. Or potentially, if you start to increase the volume, it can really start to cost you. You get up to 10, 12, 15 hours a week, and most of your, what should be feeling pretty easy endurance, is actually quite difficult. Like it's over, you know, that kind of, that intensity domain shift from the moderate to the heavy domain. So LT1-ish, we could say, you know, that.
That can really, really, really give you problems in the long run because it adds so much extra fatigue without actually adding any kind of extra adaptation except for what you initially get by doing basically tempo work. You know what I mean? Yeah. The endurance ride intensity thing is something that I have to talk about a lot with a lot of my clients.
The best way to probably think of it for most people is if you go and do an hour and a half endurance ride and you come back feeling quite fresh, you've done it right. And you probably want to feel about the same whether that ride is an hour and a half or four hours long. Obviously, as it gets longer, you're going to pick up lots of little aches and pains simply from sitting on a bike for a bit longer. And if it's your first four hour ride, that's going to be a little hard no matter what anyway, but you can get used to it.
But in principle, you don't want to come back from those rides feeling floored. You shouldn't need a nap afterwards. I'm guilty of this. I'm terrible at endurance pacing, but that's because I'm currently one of those people who's not sticking to a plan. I'm going out and doing very much a vibes-based approach to training. But I'm being smart about monitoring my ability to recover to not overdo it every single day. But when you are trying to...
Build Fitness Up, it's very important that those easy rides are truly quite easy. And the times where you can accept that is basically going to be the ones where it's, you know, the eight-hour epic. If you've decided to go do the Tour de Flanders Sportif, then you're probably going to have a rough time of it. I also get the question a lot, like, was this ride too easy? It felt too easy.
And actually, that's a funny thing about the Absolute RPE sometimes, is that when you, like actually, I'm thinking of a client right now, actually I can name two or three, four clients like this, where I tell them to go easier on their endurance ride. And so a lot of the time, it'll go from like, let's say it's like 210 watts or something like that. And then I say, go easier, go suspiciously easy.
The power will go down to like 190, 180, and they'll go, wow, this feels really easy. This feels, was this too easy? And objectively, no, it was not too easy. I've only said yes to that question once ever. Somebody asked, was this endurance ride too easy? Yes, this was too easy. He's got about a 400 watt FTP. His LT1 is about 330-ish on a bad day.
350, 360 when he's in good shape. And I know it's ridiculous. Well, then his FTP is up higher when it's up to 360. But he did like a seven-hour ride at like 100 watts. And he was like, was this too easy? And I said, yes. Because normally his endurance rides are like on the low end, like 220, 230. And that's fine. But there is a lower limit, but it's very, very, very low.
And when you try to look at somebody's RPE, and this is from a coaching perspective, when you look at that RPE, and somebody is, you'd suspect they're riding a little too hard for their endurance pace, and they're putting down like a five, for me, five is top of my endurance range. Like that's where my absolute RPE scale is. For a lot of people, that five,
or whatever they're doing. I've got to meet them where they are at for their RPE scale. And so when they pull it back, those 30 watts, they'll put down like a two. And then I go, oh, now I see it. So I now have to assign endurance pace at like an RPE of two. And then they start to nail it. And then we really see that progression because you're no longer adding all that extra fatigue.
Yeah, the 20 to 30 watt reduction is probably the smartest thing you can do in your training, if you're fearing that you're overdoing it on those easy rides, because it's not going to make a lick of difference about what happens at the other end. But you're going to feel great when you get off it. Maybe your butt will hurt a bit more, because there's a bit less force on the pedals, but, you know, it's better than your legs falling off. Yeah, I agree. What do you got next?
So, kind of leaning into the intensity part of what we just talked about. So this is a two-part point, and that's that your training plan is a series of anaerobic capacity intervals, slash you've found the miracle interval that will solve everything. Essentially, people...
Don't actually focus on the things that are actually going to improve them as an athlete, either because they have decided that their plan resembles a lot of high-intensity interval training and pretty much nothing else, or they have found some sort of interval that is the key to raising their FTP by whatever metric. Hold on. Let me interrupt you with something. What about the science, Rory?
I also have to point out that Rory has a PhD. He's very well versed in science, and he's got publications himself. And he's also, by the way, taught several British and UK Olympians, among others. Just don't ask me what I taught them. It does overlap with cycling, but sadly, I think I've taught...
All three of them, how a heart works. So I suppose in some way I've helped them understand their VO2 max. So what about the science though? Because a lot of people will say, well, there's this publication that says, if I do these types of intervals, it's going to raise my VO2 max. And so they just go ham on that stuff. I would say for the most part that the...
The aims of researchers when it comes to publishing work and the aim of coaches is very, very different. The science side of things is somewhat constrained in terms of the athletes they have available to them, the things they're allowed to actually do with them, and how they design experiments. An awful lot of the time you can read through the methodology section of these papers and you've realized that, oh, coaches just don't do this. This isn't really...
Matching Up With What It Is We See. Like you mentioned a moment ago, if you go and do VO2 max intervals at 120%, you're nose breathing for the first part of that until it maybe picks up a little bit. When I go do a VO2 max interval,
I think I end up topping out my VO2 max at around 160 odd percent of FTP. So when you look at a scientific paper and it's telling people to do something that's at 120 or 135 or whatever it is, the important thing you understand is that that's not how people actually end up training. And so being able to compare all these different training methodologies doesn't really work because it's not...
Comparing Reality. You're comparing two things that the researchers have decided to look at, but the unfortunate part is you're not really comparing coaching to coaching. It's two different things they're looking at. Also, the individual is not the average. Yeah. That's probably the biggest one. Yeah, I've got athletes that are at that 110% of FTP. One of them has an FTP 100 watts higher than mine.
and yet our VL2 max intervals are about the same color. That's the extremes of the difference. So yeah, don't restrain yourself to one particular interval type would be the main thing I'd want to instill in people. Variety really is the spice of life and it's a very important part of training. Sometimes you don't want much variety.
We recommend doing VO2 max intervals in terms of max effort, trying to keep cadence up in order to alleviate a little bit of the fatigue. That's a very one-note way in which to do some of this work, but we recommend that because we've seen it and we've seen how it works and it works very, very well. But if your entire training plan looks like VO2 max intervals or anaerobic capacity intervals,
Then, yeah, it's not, eventually you're going to reach that point where, like, it stops working. And, like, trust me, you do a month of anaerobic capacity intervals, it's going to do great things for your fitness in one way, but it's not going to do much when you take that, like, holistic view of everything that you need to be able to do on the bike. Was the Coggin saying that there's many ways to skin an aerobic cat?
Like, this is one of them. You need many ways in order to do it. Yeah. And actually, that gets towards my next point, because, you know, when you're talking about so many, you know, just hammering VO2 max intervals all the time, I've actually started with clients who had been doing this. They'll, you know, hop on some HIT bandwagon or a polarized bandwagon, and so it's either easy endurance or 3x8s.
And like, that's it. That's all they do. And in one way, it's good for their fitness because all that easy riding is good. All the VL2Max work is good to a point. And what happens is their FTP stops going up at a certain point. And so like your FTP might be 300 watts or something like that, doing all that high intensity interval work and doing some easy riding. But you're only using your FTP to determine fitness.
And so a lot of the time when people come from that to working with me, their FTP will go down about 10 watts because I'm no longer hammering them with VO2max stuff constantly. It's, you know, part of a holistic training plan. And even losing 10 watts of FTP, they get so much more fit and their results get so much better because we're working on a lot of other things that they need. Like, for instance, if you are bad at repeated acceleration,
That's something that we're going to work on that, you know, a 3x8 is not going to help. And especially if you don't get to race that much, because racing is certainly a good training for other racing a lot of the time. But, you know, when you are only using your FTP to determine your fitness, you miss out on so many other things because you're focused, laser focused on this one metric. And like, even if you like expand your horizon to TTE.
How long can you hold your FTP? That is going to change the game for a lot of people for the better, just by adding in one extra dimension on what this single metric is doing, right? Yeah, when it comes to the TTA extension work, that tends to be what I start with with most athletes, unless we're rushing to a race that's coming up far too soon.
Sometimes you need to convince people of the worth of it. I found the easiest way is to just give them their FTP in kilojoules. So they start out 30 minutes TTE for however many watts. If you get their TTE up to 60 minutes, you just need to show them the difference. Here's your capacity to hold threshold. It has literally doubled from what we've been able to do.
The thing I tend to tell people at the very start of the coaching process is I want them to have that workout every so often where they feel like they can just go for days and days and days. They feel so strong. Usually that's going to be one of those days where we're pushing TTE out to like two plus hours in sweet spot, possibly even an hour plus in FTP, depending on how we're structuring the workouts, because those are the workouts where you really realize how much.
TTE can play into how you perceive your own fitness. Not just because you're able to go all day, but because it's very easy to compare, I did two and a half hours of sweet spot today, and at the start of this process, I did an hour. And you can notice that difference. You can literally run out of the road that you've been using to train on if you're doing it like that. That's one of them good problems. One of my clients recently was like,
I'm annoyed at getting fitter because my normal FTP testing climb is now too short for me because I'm going up so much faster. Yeah, one of my clients I started with a few months ago. He lives in the Bay Area and his climb, I think, ended up capping out about...
26 minutes, so we had to structure all his FTP intervals in such a way that he was able to use that stretch of road in order to improve, and the problem was that as soon as we got TT out past 50 minutes, that increased the number of reps he had to do, because if he just extended the length of each interval each time he was running out of road, so we had to basically say, okay, you're doing shorter intervals, but you're just going to do more of them.
And like, yeah, that's one of those ways in which you can really just feel how much fitter you're getting. Yeah. And for anybody wondering, by the way, when we're talking about an hour or two hours or whatever, this is not like a single interval most of the time. This is like... Sometimes. Sometimes it is, for sure. But for me, at least, that's a somewhat rare occasion. Actually, a lot of the time, I'll use that to gauge fatigue, like in a block, as I'll send somebody out, like, give me, you know, give me sweet spot watts and...
Go to like a 6 out of 10 RPE. And where they stop will tell me how fatigued they are. Because a lot of the time, like a 6 out of 10 RPE, before you're mid-season and exhausted, is going to end up being probably an hour, hour and a half, something like that, if you're really well trained. In-season, I'll see 20 minutes, 40, 30.
I hardly ever see over an hour at that point for that kind of stuff. Anyway, having that on your radar is really smart, but where were we? Markers of fitness. I think the other thing is to maybe call out some.
Your sprint power going up, your 1 minute and 30 second power going up, basically your ability to do anything over FTP, your ability to do those really long rides and come back from them feeling fresh, these are all things that you should be thinking about in terms of how you are tracking your improvement throughout a year. Because we've all had that feeling where you might be forced to take a few months off, you get back on the bike and it just feels...
Like hell, it's the worst thing you've ever done for even just the easiest of rides. And then a few months later, you're buying out a six-hour endurance ride every other weekend. Those are the things you should definitely pick out as ways in which you improve. There's also something to be said there for when should you be improving things.
Like, you're probably not going to see much FTP improvement in race season, if you have a race season, simply because you don't have the time, you don't have the ability to expend that energy and recover from it, and race, it's a lot. But during the season, you can be looking at all those other things, like, if you're trying to prepare for, like, one event, like, is your anaerobic capacity going up? And that can just be as simple as, are your watts going up for...
you know that 30 second to a minute hill that you've got nearby that you like to hit sometimes like like Strava segments took over cycling for about five years but that was also five years ago they were a really good way for people to see oh I'm getting faster and everyone has the one that they care about like
in Edinburgh here, it's Arthur Seat, so everyone wants to get a better time up Arthur Seat. It used to be in Glasgow, Crow Road, but the pros have kind of ruined that for us. So, yeah, like, find all those other ways in which you can look at the ways you improve, because there's a lot of them. Yeah. So, actually, that goes into my next point, and I forget whose turn it is, but I'm going to steal it anyway. It's that...
One of the things that keeps people from getting fitter is that they don't have a feedback mechanism to watch these improvements. And this actually kind of folds into picking your power target before, because if you're always doing five-minute efforts at the same watts, who knows if you're getting more fit? You've got to go test that stuff at least. And so if you are doing something like...
Working on your FTP, understanding also where you are in the process of, is FTP work going to make my FTP go up, or is it not going to make my FTP go up? Because noob gains, pretty much anything makes FTP go up, including doing FTP stuff. Once you get really well trained, doing FTP work does not make FTP go up for just about anybody. You can extend it, and that's something to watch. Like, am I adding interval time? So instead of going out and always doing a 2x20, try to add a third interval.
Try it for five minutes, 10, 20, and, you know, three by 20. Like, now we're talking. Like, before, you only did two by 20, and it was probably pretty hard, but now you worked on it, and now you're getting more fit. So that's a feedback mechanism. Like, testing your one-minute power, like when you're just talking about anaerobic capacity. Like, 30-second one-minute power, or sprint power even. These are all things that you can use to watch if that is something that you are working on.
and even occasionally when you're not, this kind of stuff will show you how fresh you are. A lot of the time, not for everybody, but for most people, your peak power, your five second power will pretty much show you that you are well fed, well slept, nicely topped up and probably ready to start training again if you've like taken a rest or if you're like coming into a big race, if you see like a PR like one minute power or anything like that, a lot of the time,
Like a PR in one area will almost always correlate with a PR in other areas. Doesn't mean you should see it on race day, but it should give you a big boost of confidence that what you've been doing has been working. And I've seen this with a couple of my clients, actually. I remember one, he set some best ever like sprint power and one minute and a couple other things heading into a big race. And then his race was terrible. And it turned out that he had changed his fit.
Heading into the race. I remember you telling me this. Yeah. And I was like banging my head on the wall. I'm like, why was he getting so fit? And then, and then the race was bad. Yeah. And then, you know, it was something that I wasn't even looking at. So actually, that's one of the things that I was just co-author on an article about bike fit and women's cycling. And that was one of the things that I
mentioned, I forget if it made it to the article because so much has to get cut out, but it was basically like to keep notes of your bike fit changes, like in training peaks or wherever in a way that you or your coach has access to it and a record of it. Because if I had seen that, like, oh, I lowered my front end by two centimeters. Oh, okay then. So anyway, feedback mechanisms on fitness.
Yeah, just going in and doing the same thing at the same power targets over and over, you're not going to have an objective way to see if it's working. Yeah, I've got two things on that. The important one I think people need to hear is this does not mean you need to go out and do a test every other week. If you are doing like TTE extension work, like say that's by doing...
Five to Ten Extra Minutes of Sweet Spot every workout. You can trust that your FTP is getting longer as you do it. You don't need to go and do that test. The only time I will ever make someone do another FTP test is after I think FTP has gone up, because that's the thing I want to track.
If we are going out and someone is pushing out to two plus hours of sweet spot in a workout, I can trust that their TTE is out there. I don't need to force them to go through the test, even though, remember, the test shouldn't feel hard until those fuzzy last five to ten minutes. But it's a way to just sort of trust that you're getting that progress within the training. The other thing I'd say is trying to pick out those
Points in which you're able to track that improvement and seek that feedback. Like, I think I had an athlete email, Cole, not too recently, basically saying like, oh, here's what we've done and I'm getting like all-time power PBs and pretty much all we've done there is I slammed him with anaerobic capacity work because when he started with me, his A-race was in six weeks. So it's like, okay, we've got one option here and two.
I rested him a lot more. And the only reason his power went up there was because of the rest. It wasn't just the fact that we slammed him with anaerobic capacity work. That shaped what the improvement he was going to get was going to be. But it was the fact that we made sure that, OK, you're feeling good when it comes to actually having to do these watts when you have to turn up to the race. And that's the feedback mechanism.
like the feedback wasn't necessarily just the fact that Watts went up, it's the fact that he felt great and if you are you know getting ready to go for a workout and you don't feel great that is the number one sign that you should not be doing that workout go do something else go take it easy like we started this talking about how some people can't stick to a plan part of that is being willing to be as fluid as possible because
When your internal feedback mechanism, i.e. your brain or your legs or anything else is telling you, I don't want to do this, then you shouldn't be doing it. Yeah. Although I usually tell people to get on the bike and warm up and see what happens because it's like, you know, it's 40-60 that somebody's going to feel pretty good. But a lot of the time, majority of the time, they, you know, they warm up and nothing's happening. They're not getting better. They're feeling worse. And then it's like, I went home and I'm like, good.
I'm going to put in a workout for you to like 20 minutes tonight just eating ice cream. Yep. Best thing you can do is the ice cream workout sometimes. Yeah. Seriously? Like I have, I've put in like one pint Ben and Jerry's in so many people's workouts because like when they're feeling bad and a lot of time it's just like you just need the extra carbs and you need the downtime and you need the, you need that stress relief of eating ice cream.
Right now you need more water if you're in the US or Europe. Yes. Where it's roasting hot. You just needed to have a day and hydrate. Yeah. I am so dehydrated constantly. It's so fucking hot out right now. I live in Scotland, so I'm anything but hydrated. Dehydrated. So I think we're actually, we're on to you. So what's your next one? Yeah.
Thinking along similar lines in terms of you do a sweet spot workout, you can assume you're making progress providing the workout smart and you're seeing an improvement from the last time you did it. If you are finding that you're stagnating, but if someone looks at your training plan and points out that there's no progression plan within that training plan, you shouldn't expect that you're going to get much faster.
That is maybe not the case when you're one of the fortunate people at the beginning of the journey, still getting noob games where doing literally anything will help you. But ultimately for 90% of people, you're not going to get fitter if there is not a route to getting fitter within the plan. And you're also not going to get fitter if you don't know what the progression goal actually is of anything.
The old FTP workout people used to do was just, they're going to do a 2x20 twice a week, every week, until the end of their lives. And if you're brand new, that'll do something. We know now that it probably won't, other than just making you really tired. You need to build on that, like do 2x22.5 or do 2x22.
Whatever it ends up being, just make sure you're doing that little bit more when you're doing the workouts that require a little bit more time. When it comes to those workouts that are really high intensity, understand how you increase the training stimulus in not only a way that's going to work in terms of building you fitness, but also in a way that you can actually tolerate. A lot of people will end up smashing a workout that is basically an anaerobic capacity workout and then...
at the other end of it say, oh, I failed this workout. But that's because they don't understand, you know, what's the purpose of the workout? What's it meant to look like? What are you meant to feel during it? Cole, you've talked a lot about VL2 max intervals being done. Maximally expect power to come down. If someone's not expecting that, and their power comes down every time, they're going to do that thing where it's like, oh, I couldn't hold the watt, so I just quit the workout. In reality, like, that's not what the progression goal is. The progression goal is,
Accept the Power Loss, Recover a Bit More Between Them. If you need to take 30 minutes between a set of intervals, go for it. If that's what it takes for you to then just go and do the rest of your workout, do it. But understand exactly what the purpose of a workout is when you put it into your plan. Because if you don't, how are you going to know if it's going to do anything? So I think what you're getting at here is understanding the mechanism of progression.
in a workout itself, because a lot of people will say, like, oh, I'm doing VO2 max intervals, I started with 4x5, I'm doing 5x5, now should I do 6x7, 8x5? And my answer is absolutely not, unless that's, you know, there are reasons to do that kind of workout, but, you know, for VO2 max improvements, I would say probably not, because the fatigue that you gather doing a workout like that, even if you nail it, is very, very high. And this is what
What bodybuilders, I wrote an article about this a long time ago, stealing phraseology from Mike Isretel, who's a YouTuber, bodybuilder, whatever. He's got good resources and that kind of stuff, if you're interested. I just find it fascinating that those guys are so huge, thanks to science and pharmacology, of course. But he calls it stimulus-to-fatigue ratio. So the stimulus might be high, but the fatigue is...
Off the charts for like an 8x5 VO2 max workout. Like I recently had somebody do an absolutely insane workout because, and he's got a long time to recover from this, by the way, because, and we built up to it too, because I knew that it was going to be enough. And he did similarly 40 minutes over threshold, but there's a purpose to this offering. It's very targeted.
and he's got a lot of runway to recover. But if you do this and you're expecting your next workout to be in like two days, there's no fucking way you're gonna do that workout and you're not gonna do it well. So when you're looking at like VO2s, the intensity is the progression, just like lifting weights. It's like when you're getting in there and you're doing like three, four, five sets of heavy stuff close to failure.
Like, you have a pass-fail thing, and you know next time you get in there, you can either add a rep or two, or you can add a couple kilos on the bar. And that's your watching the progression happen. When you're doing VO2s, a lot of the time, you should see the watts going up a little bit, or we've got some other stuff that we are probably not going to talk about on the podcast, because they're little proprietary things. Apologies, I don't mean to lord it over everybody that we've got stuff that's not going to get on the podcast, but we've got to, you know.
People are paying us for this stuff, so we can't put everything out there. But yeah, so that's like an understanding the mechanism of progression. And like anaerobic capacity, like they never feel good. Ever, ever, ever. Like no matter how big the watts are. Yeah, like in terms of like those really specific workouts, I had to go through one of them. Fabiano put me through one where it was three to four sets of
5 minutes, 30 second on, 30 second off, all out, into 4 3 minute time trials, all out, and that was because my, and in aerobars, because that was the thing I was preparing for at the time, and it was miserable, and I did a really bad job, because I just wasn't feeling it that day, even though I persisted through, and like, those are the times where, you know, workouts get weird.
I usually tell people that one of the things I want is I want you to be able to remember a workout in your head because 99 times out of 100 if you can't remember it in your head then it's probably too weird or you know it's one of these things that people think looks like a good workout when in reality it's you know just complicated in order to make whoever wrote it look good and that goes down to even like
Over-Unders. Like, if I give over-unders, it would be like two minutes at the under, 30 seconds over. And someone doesn't need to write that down or have it in a head unit. They should just be able to say, two minutes, 30, you know, I'm going to be changing my effort up on four minutes, do 30 seconds, then it's going to be at four and a half minutes to five minutes.
The only time where you're maybe going to have to write it down is if you're doing something like anaerobic capacity simply because you're so oxygen starved at a certain point. But for the most part, if you can't remember a workout in your head, simplify it. Work out what the purpose of the workout is. What do you actually need to do to accomplish that goal and make sure it fits? Yeah. Actually, one of our coaches had said to me, one of the things I told him that changed the game for him,
was that you need to understand what you're working on. And even if what you're working on is just maintenance, because at certain times a year, you're not expecting fitness to go up, or you're expecting like, well, you're not expecting FTP to go up, but you're expecting other things to improve as you work on them. And so kind of understanding the ebb and flow of the periodization scheme in a season, and even having a periodization scheme.
a lot of the time, even if it's incredibly rudimentary, rudimentary, and, you know, that kind of like, that's the right way to put this, even if it's the most basic bitch periodization stuff you could possibly imagine, it's going to be way better than not having it at all, and most of the time, there's, I mean, there's a reason that a lot of this stuff is kind of canonical in the cycling world, because it's proven to work to a large degree, like endurance tempo, FTP,
VO2 Max, Race. There you go. You've got a five-month periodization scheme. Done. No questions asked. It'll probably work pretty well for just about everybody until you get to that point where things get a little more complicated, and that's where we come in. But the other part of that is an awful lot of the  so we've talked a little bit about how you spend your intensity within a week and within a plan.
I've described things like sweet spot and FTP as being quote unquote easy. It's the sort of work that is very manageable for you to be able to get through. But that's partly to also ensure that when you get to the point where the workouts need to be hard, things like VO to max intervals, things like anaerobic capacity intervals, that's when you're spending that extra energy. You're going into those blocks.
Feeling Fresh Enough to do them, such that you can execute on them, and then you recover afterwards, and you're building up that ability to then go again when required, because you can't just smash it every single time. You shouldn't feel drained after every single workout. Yeah, and no matter what people tell you about AMPK, that is actually what the next Wattstock is going to be on, is exactly that. So I guess this brings us to my last one.
which is actually related to periodization and this is probably one of the biggest things that I've seen and one of the most common things that I've recommended to people in consultations because I consult with a lot of people and just about everybody who I would say 70 to 80% of people do not take a deliberate mid-season break. A lot of the time the reason I see a gap in
Anything is either from life stuff, or sickness, or injury, or something like that. And those usually, to a large degree, can qualify as a break. But if you are just like, man, I just want to train all fall and all winter, and I'm going to get to the spring, I'm going to be firing on all cylinders, you are going to be scraping your legs up off the side of the road in that first spring race. Like, it might work for a couple races, but...
By the time you get to, like, if you got a goal in June, and you start racing in February, March, you're not making it to June. Especially if you started training hard in, like, September. There's absolutely no way. And you didn't take a break from your last season. So, making sure that you get a rest between seasons is so necessary if you want to see progression. And part of it is because you are accumulating that chronic fatigue, even at a low level, even if you were...
Week to Week and Month to Month Training Plan is really well controlled. There's absolutely no avoiding it. You have to take that break because if you really want to get yourself to progress next year from where you're at now, you have to be ready and fresh enough to absorb that training load. Your body's got to be recovered from the last one. Otherwise, what's going to happen is your fitness...
is going to just, it's going to tank. And a lot of people are actually, speaking of which, a lot of people are terrified of taking a mid-season break because they don't want to see all their hard-earned gains fall off the cliff. And guess what? If you don't take a good break, all those fitness improvements you've seen, they're going to fall off the cliff anyway.
But one way, you're getting nice and rested doing it. The other way, you are going to be hammering your legs into the ground, and you're going to end up in the same spot. And one of them, you're going to be motivated to get that fitness back, and you're going to have the capacity to do it. And the other one, you're going to be quitting the sport. Yeah. A lot of people want to go into their winter and do cyclocross, and that's great.
I'm willing to support athletes that want to do that, but there has to be an understanding there that you're going to take a bit of a break at some point and you have to expect that you're not going to get much fitter than you are right now. Because going from one race season straight into another and then having to go straight into another after that, there's only so much time in which to actually be able to do the workouts that need to be done. And frankly, if you're not going to give yourself enough time to make those improvements...
You can't go into them expecting you're going to improve in whatever way it is you've chosen. And yeah, I fully agree in terms of the slow digging a hole to China, because that's inevitable in a lot of cases. You can see that with Pagacar after World Championships. Had a massive spring season, got injured, went to the Tour de France, got beaten, came to the World Championships, and
clawed himself onto the podium. And the impact after that was, I think he got fined because he didn't go to the mix area afterwards because they had to get him out of there because he was basically collapsing. And when you see any pictures of him then and in the days after, he's been saying he doesn't feel right. That race cooked him. It's one of the hardest races I've ever seen. It was great. If you were watching the women's race on Sunday, you might have seen me screaming in their faces.
It was good fun. Yeah, that was also one of the hardest races I've ever seen. Yeah, and it was the first time I felt our Road World Championships actually justified its course. And I'm not saying that because I'm Scottish. I'm saying it because it was the first World Championships where I was actually entertained. And we also got a really nice poetic ending where the strongest person won. In both road races. Yeah, and that should appeal to the gravel crowd too.
Yeah. It was very much a gravel race type ethic if you're not there at the start. Yeah. One of the things Megan said, she went with the national team. Megan's one of my clients and also one of our coaches now. She went with the national team to Belois and what's the other one? Argenta. And she absolutely loved it.
She was like, it's non-stop, it's like corners, cobbles, we got hail and lightning and rain, and it was like the full Belgian experience in one day, and we've got like five more to go. And so she loved it, but she called it a gravel crit. It was like as hard as gravel, but you need all the skills of a crit racer, and she was all about it. And I saw that course, and I was like, this is a true Belgian hard person's course.
I was actually sad that I will never be that talented to be able to race something like that, because it looks like real good fun. Two things there. First one is, apparently Lotta Capecchi was doing a bunch of Belgian kermesses before Worlds. Oh, with the junior men? Yeah.
Get used to this style of a really aggressive, constant race, and that's clearly paid off. Second thing is your friend Adam, his client, Alison Jackson, clearly wasn't having a good day in terms of the legs, but tell you what, when she came around the course, I've never seen such a big smile from someone going up a 20% grade. Probably because she had a donut in her mouth at the same time.
I think she got that just after me. I didn't actually see it in person. But she was loving it. That leads us on to, I think, my final reason why you're not getting faster, which is you have an expectation mismatch. This could also be the I want a 300 watt FTP by June.
Reason. And it's May, and you're currently at 240. Yeah. Or the no, you don't need to test every month category, which we've talked a little bit about before. But essentially, don't go into your training expecting a specific outcome, other than if I do this correctly, I will see an improvement of whatever type it is that you're aiming for.
Don't try and quantify that improvement before it actually happens, because the only thing that's ever going to happen there when it doesn't happen is you're giving yourself a reason to be disappointed, when in reality the thing that you should be looking for is, okay, this worked. Why did it work as much as it did? What did I do that made it work? Is there a way I can improve it in the long run? And providing the ways you improve it in the long run isn't...
Violating the things we've talked about today in terms of you don't need to go and do four interval sessions a week. That's not going to help you. That's how you're going to make that steady incremental progress. That client that I threw lots of anaerobic intervals at, when I first spoke to him in our initial call, one of the questions he asked me was, how many watts are you going to add to my FP? And I said, I have no idea. I don't know. I can't promise that.
And he was quite happy. I think it was a trick question because he was quite content with the answer. But yeah, I don't promise that sort of thing. You can't go into your season saying, I'm going to have a 360-watt FTP by March because it doesn't work like that. You've got to go into your training plan understanding. If everything goes well, and sometimes, remember, it doesn't have to go well. It just needs to...
Go Well Enough, I am going to see steady incremental progress by whatever date you expect it to happen. So for example, if you go through two blocks of sweet spot and then do some VO2max work, you should hopefully be seeing an FTP improvement by the end of that VO2max block. If it happens,
Great, then you have done it as best you can. If it doesn't happen, that's not a failure. You've still done a lot of good work. You've still done that TTE extension. You've done a VO2 max block. You probably need to analyze why isn't it that it's happened? Did I not recover enough? Did I not eat enough, sleep enough? Did I actually get the best out of myself in those workouts?
Find those reasons why things don't work, and then don't beat yourself up because you didn't hit them. Cyclists are absolutely terrible for that. People need to be a lot more honest about how much they are actually improving. That goes back to what we talked about in terms of finding different types of feedback and the different ways to actually monitor your fitness. But don't act like you're going to be a cat one.
by the next race season. Because what you should actually be looking for is, I'm going to feel better than I do right now. That's the ultimate goal. Yeah, keeping yourself as your only benchmark for improvement, and especially not comparing yourself to others. Because one of the things that we've seen time and time and time again is that some people respond,
And some people don't respond very well at all. And, you know, it's not like, actually, and here's another thing that that reminds me of occasionally when somebody doesn't respond that well to the training, or, you know, especially if their life stress is super high or anything like that, things aren't going well. I've had a lot of people apologize to me for wasting their time.
I did that to Fabiano. I apologized because I wasn't doing my workouts. And he was just like, no, it's all right. You're not here to improve every time. You're here to stay on it. Because that was what I was there for. Yeah, no. And our job is to help. And that's what we're here for. That's what we like to do as coaches.
You know, you're super consistent, or you're a world tour pro, or like you're just want to do your first gravel race. It doesn't matter. Like we're here for you. It's not the other way around. And so at the only time I've ever actually, I've only once ever told somebody that I couldn't work with them because I had worked with them previously and their level of life stress and management and everything like that was off the charts for me.
and I couldn't even imagine how they were managing it. And so I said, I don't think you need a coach. I think you need me to tell you how to train yourself and you can manage the ebb and flow because the amount of time that we spent texting, on calls, like back and forth on Training Peaks comments, like it was, it was, I, honestly, it was like having four clients in one, maybe more. And so I was like, I don't think.
Hope he paid you well. Well, yeah, I mean, yeah, he paid the normal rate, but at the same time, like, I actually didn't think I was being a good, effective coach at that point either. I didn't think he was getting much out of me. And so I said, I don't think that this is the right fit for you. And coaching sometimes is not the right fit for everybody. But yeah, but, you know, for the most part, like 99.999% of people are fucking awesome.
and they're trying hard and as long as you're trying hard, we're trying hard. Like if you check out, you know, we've all had clients check out and we just say, hey, you know, this is probably not the right time to be coached for you. And it's no hard feelings, but, you know, because we all just want what's best for everybody. Yeah, and like the expectations things extends to your coach if you have one. Like your coach will be one of us or someone else.
Like, they shouldn't be getting on your back about things like race results, for example. Like, I don't worry too much about whether my clients are winning races. The thing I want to hear is, did they feel good during the race? Because if they feel good, if they feel strong, that means I've done my job right. And, you know, there's a conversation to be had about, you know, why is it that you didn't win? Or, you know, what could you have done better? Flat derailleur fall off? Yeah. This is one of the stories I told during our last recording.
I had an athlete go to Snake Alley, which I can't remember what town it's in, but effectively it's a crit with a really twisty, cobbled, steep street that you have to go up every single lap. They're brick, not cobbles. Oh. Okay. But the way that race is meant to be run is that you line up in the order that you sign on in, and for whatever reason the comms running the race that day decided not to obey that rule.
And so he ended up going out, doing his warm-up, safe in the knowledge that he would be on the front row when he got there, and they hadn't done that, and they had to line up at the back. And the result of that was, I think he ended up doing three laps before he ended up getting pulled, because when you have a race like that, the course stretches out so much that after lap one, you're never going to see the front again. The front hits the top of the hill, and you're in the first turn at the bottom of the hill. At the bottom, yeah.
felt incredible that day. He said, like, if I was in the right place, I would have had the race of my life. And I was like, perfect. I'm ecstatic that you heard that. I'm very angry at the commissars, but I'm very happy that the training went well. Because we got to the point, like, my job as a coach is to help you feel good, and part of making you feel good is helping make you fitter. It's also making sure that...
When it comes to the things that matter most to you, you go into them feeling as strong as you can. And if you get a flat, if you crash, anything else, those things happen. There's lots of ways to lose a bike race, certainly more than there is to win one. That's a great phrase. Yeah, the expectations I have are that you enjoy yourself, because that's why we do it. Yeah, for sure.
Actually, you know what? I could expand a lot on that, but we'll save it for another podcast, because there's going to be some inside baseball. So we'll save everybody's ears. Now, I actually have a couple more things in case we had some overlap, and let's just get through these real, real quick. So tell me about stress. Stress is anything that makes you feel like crap.
And it doesn't really matter where that stress source comes from. The point is that it makes you feel like crap. So this goes into what we talked about earlier in terms of if you have to go and do an FTP interval on Tuesday and you wake up on Tuesday feeling like shit because you went out drinking or you had a really stressful day at work or you know you're going to have a stressful day at work, that's a good reason not to do the workout that day. You need to make sure that you're taking
Not just a view of your training plan, but also a view of your life as a whole and how training fits into that. Because it comes back to what I said at the beginning, like when I get people to give me their availability, one of the things I'm hoping they'll also give me is the days where it's bad to do something. And the expectation on my side is if something comes up, if it's impromptu, if it's five minutes before a workout they're going to do, I've always told people just...
Get on your bike and do an easy endurance ride. Do whatever you feel like doing. Don't force a workout that's not going to go well. Because it's not going to go well and it's not going to help you. It's just going to make you more tired. When in reality, the thing you needed to do was just relax a bit. And sometimes relaxing is not riding. Sometimes it is just you wanted to ride your bike, but you just didn't want to do a sweet spot effort. Yeah, for sure. And actually, I think that gets to something else that happens with highly motivated people.
the downward spiral of failing a workout and that being stressful. And now you're stressed for your next workout, which absolutely bones your recovery for the next workout. And so now you're going to have another one and another one and another one. Yeah. Sorry. DJ Khaled's going to sue me now. People shouldn't measure like they're worth by the last workout they did. Yeah. Because you can.
like the typical progression in a lot of workouts for something like sweet spot is you do a little bit more than you did last time and if you can't do more than you did last time that's probably a sign that you were fatigued but you're not less fit you're just tired yeah it goes back to what we were talking about with like two a week or one a week being like the optimal amount for most people and that's simply because
If you keep it to that two week or one a week, you're going to be able to do the workouts in all likelihood. When you're getting to three, that's when you're really stressing yourself. You're never giving yourself a real opportunity to get over it. Unless everything you do off the bike is super dialed and chill. Because the number of people where two is the optimal workout, here's the thing. I think also when we discuss these targets for hard workouts per week,
It's not necessarily the fact that you've got to find the absolute maximum that you need to do. You need to find a reasonable amount that makes you more fit as you go. You've got to be looking for that progression. And if you're trying to squeeze every little drop out of yourself, this adds on-bike stress, but also adds off-bike stress because the amount of mental fatigue that it takes.
to be trying to optimize constantly instead of going, this kind of works and I'm able to ride it out for a couple weeks or months. That is so much better. I've had a couple clients this year who, whether it's family problems or job stress or life stress or buying a house or anything like that, while that's happening, I go back to telling them, please don't stress about riding. If you can ride,
Great, do what feels good. If you've got a workout that day or like you haven't ridden your bike for a week and you want to do a workout, just go pick one of the ones you missed. Just go enjoy it. And when the stress goes away, suddenly everybody starts getting a lot more fit. Like one of my clients, he had high stress for like four months this year, like mid-season too, like right as soon as race season started pretty much and then it ended like maybe a month ago. And during that time, I was like, you know,
We're helping him manage the whole thing, and now that it's all kind of dissipated, he's matched his best ever numbers already, and he's still got more training to go. And so finally we can make him more fit than he's been this year, which was a goal all year, but I knew it wasn't realistic, and even he knew it wasn't realistic. And so now we're both very, very happy. Things are cool. Things are chill.
and he's improving again and I think I told this during the last recording but the first time I ever saw how much of an impact stress could have is I had a client, one of my first clients actually and I trained him for a year, he got pretty fit and next year he was no longer getting fit like his fitness went back to where it had been like when we first started working together and it wasn't improving as we went in the second season.
And I was like, I can't figure this out, dude. Give me a call. And so we talked about it for a little while. We went through all the basics of nutrition and sleep and recovery and all that stuff. And he'd been doing all that stuff right. And that's one of the reasons also that we haven't really touched on this is because that's such a basic thing to us, to a lot of people listening. So it probably goes without saying that you've got to have the nutrition and sleep and that stuff dialed. But I said, what was your work stress? Because he went from being a postdoc.
to having his own startup company, being like one of the main scientists there. And he said last year, most days was like a two to a three, the occasional eight. And this year, every single day is at least an eight, but a lot of days of the week is a 10. And then he gets home and he's trying to work out and he's not getting more fit. And like that is the impact that stress can have. And a lot of the time, if that's happening to you,
Like, most of the time, there's nothing you can do about it on the bike. Actually, leaving the bike to be something enjoyable, where you're not pressuring yourself and you don't have any stress, that can actually be a great reason or a great thing to help you at least enjoy it more. And that could, in a lot of cases, help you get more fit, but it does not necessarily always happen that way, unfortunately.
Two days ago, one of my favourite clients asked to put a pause in in the coaching, because he's currently going through the joys of, has a newborn kid, his job is really picking up in terms of what's going on for the next few months, so his ability to actually ride has severely decreased, and he got ill quite badly two weeks ago, and it was the best sign possible that, you know...
He doesn't need to try and force bikes at this point, because he's probably not going to get that much faster while all that's going on. Trying to force himself to get that much faster is going to be really, really difficult to balance it, and ultimately, the thing that matters most at that point in time is that the energy he has is spent on the child. It's not spent talking to me. You'd hope.
The thing he realised was simply he needed such a break that he just needs to step back from bikes entirely for right now. He can probably still go ride his bike, enjoy it, but he's not going to be able to do any sort of serious training and he's not going to be able to commit to anything in the short term. So we've put a pause in. My hope is once things quieten down, he'll come back. But like, yeah.
Smart Decision that he made to just recognize his whole life stress was way too high. Yeah. All right. So actually, I said we should do that one quickly, and we did not. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to set a one-minute timer for our last two. So real quick, here are my last two things on what keeps people stagnating. Let's go with, basing your current training plan on what worked with your noob gains. Go.
So, unfortunately, you can get fit really fast when you've never done anything before, but eventually that runway is going to run out and you're just going to keep going along a very flat runaway that isn't taking you anywhere. You're never going to actually get off the ground. I think when it comes to people at that very early day...
Early Days of Training, the best thing they can do is just ride their bike, and if they want to ride hard, ride hard. If you want to ride easy, ride easy. Don't worry too much about the whole stress of everything and how it all fits together. As long as you're making sure you don't feel like shit every single week, then you're probably going to be good. But eventually there's going to come a point where you need structure of some sort, or you need not necessarily a hard-coded plan, but you need an idea of how to improve on certain things.
And what you tend to find is people have noob gains very, very quickly at the beginning and it slows down. You can start it before it slows down entirely and it will help. All right. Minute three. Pretty good. All right. All right. Last one is doing what the pros do. Go.
This is kind of the inverse of what we just said there, in that pro cyclists benefit from that wonderful ability to be good at everything as a result of doing anything. And sadly, we don't have those genetic advantages. If you think about professional cyclists, I was thinking about this in terms of a Matthew Vanderpoel or a Lorena Wiebs, a Kapecki.
Riders are outliers amongst outliers. And so if you are trying to copy a former Tour de France pros training, the thing you need to account for is everything he's able to do that you're not, such as ride 30 hours a week and not have to worry about the rest of his job. You don't have a million pounds coming into your bank account every six months. These are the stressful things that they don't need to think about. And on top of that,
You're never going to be as fast as them to begin with. So don't worry about the sort of things that they're doing. The types of racing and riding they do is very different for a start. They can get to a level of fitness where there's a 5% difference between fit and unfit. For us normal people, it's like 20% sometimes. All right. Minute 15. Pretty good. Okay. Getting worse. That's all right. Okay. So I...
Oh, by the way, if anybody's curious, if you would like us to look at your files or consult with you on any follow-up questions to this. I'm usually not so heavy-handed on the advertising marketing side of these things, but if you are curious, if you want to talk to myself or Rory or any of our coaches, please reach out.
to me for a consultation. We'll give you our rights, and we will figure it out and get it all sorted. That is something that's worth noting. Some people get to the point where they don't need a coach, but a consult can do them a hell of a lot of good. If you're the sort of person where you don't think you can invest the sort of money that good coaching ends up costing, the consult can change things significantly. I know people that come to Coley for a consult.
a couple of times a year, because they don't need the constant coaching, but having that expert opinion is very, very valuable. Yeah, and actually, I haven't done that many, because I've only done a handful of people who come back for another consult over time. Usually, they just go, well, this is working great, thanks. But yeah, when they come back, actually, I've found that that, because I've been curious. The first time I did a second consult with somebody, I was like, how's this going to go? I don't know.
if there's any more that I can give to these people. And then, you know, they asked me their questions, I look at their files again, and the answer is, yeah. They had put everything in there as expected. Then there were other things to tweak, and I didn't expect that, honestly, but I was so happy that I could be of service, because if I looked at all this stuff and I didn't think that there was anything else to add, I would have been like, go back to what we talked about the first time, just try it again.
Save your money. All right. So because our last one got screwed up, our last recording quality, I had to ask on Instagram again for questions. And I actually, I kind of like this round of questions better. So I'm glad I did this. So this is our listener questions for my Instagram. Follow me at Empirical Cycling if you'd like to. Ways to break through a plateau when training volume is maxed. And I'm going to actually
Make an asterisk here, because this person asking does a lot of volume as a full-time cyclist. So not for him, but for an average person, because I also know he coaches some pretty good amateurs too. I would say you've probably got to evaluate what you're doing with that time first. We can get into things like, you know, are you...
Resting Enough? Are you still able to sleep? Are you eating enough to allow yourself to improve? But assuming you're getting everything else right, and if you're coaching other people, I'm going to hope that that's the case, unless you're like me, where I'm very much a do-as-I-say-not-as-I-do type coach, you probably want to evaluate what it is you need to do with your time, what the actual plateau you're trying to bust through is, and what you need to do in order to get through it.
and I'm trying not to talk about some of the proprietary stuff that Cole has introduced me to but there are always going to be ways in which you can start to leverage the training that you're doing in order to get you to the next level and so work out what those things are, work out what the things you've not been doing are like this year for example I've coached myself the problem I've tried to overcome in my own training
to get through my own plateau has been to do more volume than I've ever done before. And I'm doing that well because with the exception of this month, which I've been entirely ill for, up until the end of July, I'd beaten the total number of hours that I did in the entirety of 2022. So I've actually hit my goal seven months early. But that was the thing that I decided to focus on.
And the realization for me was that, you know, I did have more time to ride and I did have the ability to do it. For someone who's already maxing out on the volume that they're capable of doing, try and work out what are the things you've not done. What things have you not tried? What things could you experiment with? Because sometimes you do just need to try different things. What things are you doing that you don't have to do is maybe another one. Like if you're doing a Tuesday Night Worlds every week, maybe that's one of the reasons you're not.
Yeah, do you have to do Tuesday Night Worlds every week? Do you have to? Absolutely, 100%. And then Wednesday Night Worlds, then Thursday Night Practice Race, and then Saturday there's a long group ride. That one's always really hard. And then Sunday, maybe I get to do some FTP intervals. One of those easy workouts I talked about, a day of rest. Quite easy. Let's see.
How does it become harder to improve and maintain fitness as we age? At a certain point, you're going to reach a level where, over time, the amount of energy that you're putting in is greater than you were previously able to recover from from a start.
You could be one of those athletes that's capable of doing three workouts a week, for example. Say you're quite high volume, very well trained, able to go out and do that. You could just get to the point where three workouts becomes an awful lot. And it's not necessarily because life situation changes, like job, friends, etc. It could just be that you're at the point where recovering from that is a greater ask than you were previously capable of doing. Yeah, even in well-trained amateurs, I actually find that that's something that can be optimized for.
and I will actually have some of my people do this in waves where like we'll do some weeks with like three workouts, some weeks with two and some weeks with one and kind of which is which is basically I get a sense of their fatigue level and their recovery capacity and like how quickly they recover and this also by the way goes for people who are even like in their 20s and 30s like not just like being 40, 50, 60 but it's like
Manipulating the amount of hard stuff you do in a week and how much recovery you get, that is actually like a low-hanging fruit kind of variable to manipulate. You could potentially get so much more improvements by adding rest. And actually, here's another question a lot of people have for me is like, when do I know that I'm taking enough rest? And the answer is, well, actually, I'll let you answer this one, Rory.
If you're struggling to do the efforts you think you should be able to do, that's probably one of the number one signs that you've not rested enough. It comes back to my master's racer, for example, he's in 55 plus. So one of the difficult things with him was how are we able to balance doing a lot of really high intensity intervals? We had to have a conversation about the safety of doing them for a start because that is a constant risk that older athletes should be aware of.
Nowadays, younger athletes should be aware of it as well. And if possible, everyone should go and get their heart checked to make sure that doing something like cycling is safe, but it becomes particularly important the older you get. I know Fabiano will encourage all of his athletes around winter to go and do cardiopulmonary exercise testing, because that's something he really values to make sure that people are safe. But with him, I was able to smash him with two hard sessions a week.
He said these were harder than a lot of intervals he'd ever had to do before.
But he was able to do them every single time because the rest of his week was easy. We made sure to manage the hell out of what he was doing in the rest of his time to space things out. Like you've talked there about sometimes people do three, sometimes two, sometimes one. Like sometimes you just keep the spacing of workouts apart. Sometimes you need, say, four days between a workout. And that means that you do two in one week, one in the next, two in the one after. And that's simply because that's the amount of time you need. There's a little bit there in terms of...
People shouldn't restrict themselves to thinking in seven-day blocks. Think of it as all connected together, because it is connected all together, which is why when it comes to doing a recovery week, you don't need to take seven days extremely easy. You maybe take five days, and then you're back to it by the weekend. If you're a professional cyclist, you can maybe get away with doing three really easy days, and then you're back to normal because you're weird and superhuman. But for most people...
like break that idea of a week is Monday to Sunday. Remember like you've just come off the weekend every week and you're just about to go into a new week after every weekend and you need to be able to balance all of that out which comes again to like when I'm talking to my athletes to get an idea of what they're doing. I'm never going to give them a hard workout the day before they're going to be doing something really stressful at work because
They're going to feel like shit on the first day. They're going to feel worse in working the next day. And they're probably going to need an extra day to take it easy afterwards. You've got to space all these things out, which is why, like, don't be a slave to your training plan. Be fluid. Allow yourself to move things around. Again, you're not going to get less fit because you did one workout that week. And actually, one of the things I said to somebody once,
in a consult once, he kind of goes, well, I never thought about it like that, and most people have, but in case you haven't, you know, we're not trying to talk down to anybody or anything like that, but in case you haven't thought of this, just because the workout calendar...
is on a new line, like you've got a new week, does not mean your body recognizes, oh, tabula rasa, let's start over again. You're still feeling that weekend, so if you went really hard, really long, like both Saturday and Sunday, a lot of the time, you're not ready to go again until Wednesday or Thursday, and that's where a lot of this hard week, medium week, easier week, whatever, in a training cycle, not even a rest week, that's part of where all that stuff comes from. Okay, next listener question.
How fast should FTP increase for beginners cycling six to eight hours a week? Is the volume too low? And I actually have a feeling this is because this person is experiencing some lack of improvements, and they're wondering, are they improving fast enough? It's going to depend a little bit in terms of how much of a beginner you are. I just checked the next question, and it's from the same person. Long TTE, did a VO2 max block, 3.5 weeks. Wow.
But FTP didn't improve what to do next. Okay, so assuming you did everything right, which I'm going to clarify, whenever I talk to a new athlete, the number of times they say they've done things exactly right, I can probably count it on one hand. But assuming you have, then you probably need to look through your training and work out, you know, where have the gaps been in terms of the things that we've talked about today?
Recovering Properly. Three and a half weeks, that was a lot of VO2max work. Too much. You can probably expect that it's going to take a bit longer than that to recover. How are you actually going about everything in between those days? What did those VO2max days look like? How many of them were there? There's too many things to really give a good answer to this question in terms of why it is you specifically having improved.
Again, it gets back to what we said in terms of expectation management. Don't expect that everything will go exactly right. What I can say is, if your VO2max has not gone up, if you went out and did a long sweet spot interval or an FTP test, your TTE is probably going to still be pretty damn long, if not as long as it was before. So the good news is that you've not lost any fitness as a result of this, as a start.
but you need to work out what happened during that VO2 max block to not let it have an impact because effectively you should be expecting to trade all that TTE work for a nice juicy lump sum of FTP and that hasn't happened so you need to go and work out.
What do I need to do there? What did I do right? And B, that's one of those occasions where you should be quite harsh in terms of trying to pick out the things that are wrong. But remember that it's not wrong because you're flawed as a rider or as a person. It's just flaws in the sense that there's small improvements to be found everywhere. Even in the training plans I give to people, you can nitpick them in certain ways. But the difference is that we as coaches have an idea of what things should do.
In fact, I can give a really good example. I had an athlete a few months ago do a VO2 max block and nothing improved. We went out and did the FTP test and came back with same FTP, very long TTE. So we knew something had gone wrong there. I had a hunch during the VO2 max block that it wasn't quite working out. And the reasons for that were partly the time he had available to ride, some basically...
what he was able to do in terms of weekends, etc. And we know what it is we need to do next time. We got our answer to that. It's just a case of we need to then go and do it. And I'm confident that if we were to go and do that, we'd see the improvement we want. But even as coaches, we're going to encounter those situations where things don't quite go as expected. But the important part is we go back and find out what it is and then action on it. And I would actually recommend...
Getting in some extra rest, because one of the things that I've seen a lot of people do, and I would say this happens in probably 15 to 20% of the people that I've consulted with, is that they don't get enough rest in between blocks. So like they'll do, you know, well actually, so here's two answers. This is one of them. Like if you do your last, like via to max workout on like a Sunday, and you start your next FTP.
Workout for your FTP block on Wednesday or Thursday. You've got three or four days of not doing much. You haven't finished trading. Yeah, there's a lot more recovery to happen there. And I usually want people after something like that to rest up and feel really good before we start pushing them again. And then we'll...
kind of do like some exploratory efforts and see how the legs feel, see how the motivation's going, and then we'll either test or we'll just start training again and wait for their legs to come around before testing again. The other thing that may be a thing here is that some people don't do well with focus blocks. Some people do better mixing up FTP and VO2max and even like group rides and other fun stuff, and especially if you're low volume.
and that stuff sounds fun to you, just go do it. It's totally fine. Find a balance. But also, even if you're riding eight hours a week, I can promise that you could probably find more improvements by changing up your recovery routine or riding your endurance pace easier, stuff like that. All the basics. And there's a very large laundry list of them.
to give people an idea of what a recovery week can look like and is usually pretty effective. Most people I will give one day or two days off at the start of the week, some really chill, easy riding like Wednesday, Thursday, an endurance ride to see how the legs are on Friday and then we will throw in like a long endurance ride or maybe a workout on Saturday or Sunday.
Usually, 90% of cases, people feel good by that weekend, and they're able to absorb a lot of the stress that they've taken from the previous week or the previous three weeks, but just be hyper-aggressive when it comes to rest when you're in doubt, especially if you don't have someone looking over your training, because there's pretty much no real downside in the long term to just resting a bit more than you need to. That doesn't mean you have to take five days off, but it does mean...
Take a couple of days off. Yeah, and I have actually known coaches who say that a rest week should be like, you don't even look at a bike all week. I'm like, seven days without looking at a bike? Are you kidding me? You're going to feel so shit when you get back on it. Some people feel great, but a lot of people do not feel good, for sure. I mean, active recovery is definitely a thing. Okay, so next question is, how much do you think lifestyle and mental health contribute if you are, quote-unquote, doing the work?
So as someone who has throughout his life had poor mental health a lot, like the biggest barrier to me getting on my bike has always been mental health. It's that if I don't ride my bike today, I'll struggle to ride it tomorrow. And if I don't ride it tomorrow, I'll never ride it for the rest of the week. And that was basically how my training looked for 2014 all the way through until basically Fabiano coached me.
And it was the biggest driver, the fact that I never really improved that much. I'm fortunate in that I'm quite anaerobic as a rider, so my ability to suddenly pack on the watts at the top end was quite good. But from an FTP perspective, my FTP's fluctuated within 30 watts for the last 10 years, basically. But that's just something I've...
Made Do With As A Rider. It's gone up recently because I've trained a lot better and because Fabiano did a lot of really good work with me. It's gone up this year, I think, because I've been riding a hell of a lot more than I have in any other year. Like, this year, if I'm lucky, I think I'll double the last two years. So, you know, that's where my fitness improvement has come from this year. And that has almost entirely been down to, like, thinking about mental health and...
Whole Life Stress, and trying to make sure that I am putting myself in the position where I can minimize the negative effects of the former, and making sure that the days where I go out and enjoy my bike the most are the ones where I have been the least stressed. Because there's still those days where I have a stressful day at work and I don't want to ride the bike, and I don't. I just make sure that I really do enjoy riding it on the days that do.
Like, ultimately, look after yourself. Like, it comes back to, like, this should be fun. And if it's not fun, like, do the things that will help you make it fun. Like, we talked a moment ago about keeping training plans quite fluid. Like, as I said earlier, I'm very much in a vibes-based training mode right now. I just ride my bike. Sometimes I ride it hard. Sometimes I don't.
I, the last workout I did was like a month and a half ago, where I decided I was going to go do an FTP workout because I felt good. I did a 20 minute FTP interval and then decided, ah, I'm just going to do sweet spot for the rest of the day. So I did that because those are basically the same thing within the workout. Yeah. But that was the thing that worked for me. And sometimes you just need to think about what works for you. Yeah. And actually, Fabiano actually has a really good philosophy because he's an MD, in case folks are not aware of that. He's a sports MD.
and also has a PhD and is a very, very well accomplished smart guy. Much smarter than me. So one of the things that he says is you have to manage the symptoms and then like fill in what riding you can around that. The riding cannot interrupt your symptom management and usually that means for like being sick but I find the same thing absolutely applies to mental health too. So yeah, manage all that and even if the bike is part of mental health and for a lot of people it is, make sure that it's
contributing towards your positive mental health and not affecting it detrimentally. Expectation management. All right. Next question is  oh, I can answer this real quick. FTP still plateaus even after a volume increase and FTP work and rest. Do you need VO2 work? The answer is yes. You cannot ignore something like that. VO2 max, actually, this is pretty well known. It has been for a long time, is the ceiling for FTP.
So, yeah. We'll get into more physiology on that later in the podcast. It works for the same reason that EPO does. It's just the difference is EPO puts more blood in your veins, and VO2max work is just going to move more blood around your veins. Don't do EPO. Don't do drugs, kids. I could nitpick that, but I won't. I'm taking it simple. All right.
Oh, actually, quite a few people asked something similar to this. So how do you know if it's lack of volume or something else that's the reason for plateauing? But also questions like, how do you know if you're bumping against your physical limit versus a...
Like a training plateau. And actually, I'd say that all this kind of sounds like the same thing. Like, because Tim Cusick, when he was on the podcast, he said that a lot of amateurs will not actually hit their genetic limit for fitness. They'll hit their training time limit for fitness. And, you know, there are some things that you can do towards tweaking this kind of stuff where you can find little improvements. But, yeah, for the most part, like, if you are absolutely certain 100% of things are optimized and this is as fit as you can get.
I would actually say change your plan towards being fit for more races. If your fitness is relatively stable, no matter what you do, that means that you can actually have good fitness for more often in the year if you're like 99% there most of the time anyway. I'd say for most athletes that start with me.
The amount of time that they say they have in the beginning, they realize they actually do end up having a little bit more when it comes to future training. And it's not because they're able to find more time in their life, it's because the riding that they're doing is well managed and they're not getting overtired. And the realization is, oh, I could actually go 30 minutes extra on this day or an hour extra on this day.
They are able to do that a little bit more just because the quality of the training has improved from what they did previously. So if you're able to make improvements to the quality, you're probably going to feel like you can do more in reality. Actually, that goes towards the next question, which is, what fitness plateaus do you consider more hard workouts per week? I only do one. And actually, there was a great, I think it was a Ronstad paper.
on this, or was it Ross? I think it might have been him and like one or two other people, where they looked at responders and non-responders to training. They actually dispelled the myth of non-responder. And what they did was they had people do high-intensity workouts, like untrained or moderately active people or whatever it was. And anybody who's like VO2max or whatever markers did not go up after the first like week or two, they added an extra workout per week.
And for some people, they had them doing like four or five hard workouts per week, and that was the way that they got rid of the non-responders. But on the flip side of that, you're only doing one type of workout, and the volume is pretty low. And doing a manipulation like this comes at a cost, because a lot of the time, it's impossible to keep up for a long time, and for some folks, it's even impossible to keep up for a short time.
And so, yeah, if you're doing one workout a week, and you're not getting more fit, do two. And if you're not getting more fit, do three, and you're pretty rapidly going to run into, oh my god, this workout feels like shit, I'm probably not recovered from my last one. And that's when you know you need to add more rest, or when you're hitting the balance, or you need to add more easy volume, or something like that. Yeah, we have a mutual Welsh friend in a Discord who, he was doing...
I think it ended up being 18 Zwift races over three weeks, something stupid like that. Oh, he's Welsh? I did not know that, actually. Yeah, so he, I had a look in his data to see, like, how he was getting on, and tell you what, if you do 18 Zwift races in a month, your fitness goes through the roof, but I can also tell you that he feels like shit nowadays. There's a cost. And the thing he needs to do most is rest, and rest, like, hard.
He'll benefit from that in the long run. It'll be something that's very valuable to him. But you need to always consider, in order to break through a plateau, sometimes you need to do a lot of hard focus work. And the other side of that is, you have to expect that you're not going to be able to do the same constantly. He's not going to rest and do another 18 Zwift races next month. He's going to rest and just do some endurance riding for a time.
And that's smart for a lot of people. Actually, that goes towards what we were talking about with planning in some rest mid-season and, you know, et cetera, et cetera. Because a lot of people's seasons, like if you have, like in New England, we used to have what was called Critsmas, which was like a whole bunch of crits in a short amount of time. And actually, there was a Holy Week for Cross, too. I forget what the Cross schedule is like up there nowadays, but it was like Holy Week was actually longer than a week. It was like a week and a half.
You could even consider it two weeks at some point. And you could race, especially if you were doubling up on cross days, you could be racing like two, four, five, six, seven, eight. You could be racing 10 or 12 times in a very short amount of time. And a lot of people would, you know, because the mainland calendar, I don't know what it's like now, I said, but it was pretty fucking packed. Like you could race every couple of days for months on end.
A lot of the time after that, people are so fatigued, but then they take a week off and then they go, oh, I got to get ready for spring races. I got to start training. This is one of the things I've run into with my pro athletes who race both cyclocross and race on the road professionally. There are even some folks in warmer climates like in Spain and elsewhere where there's racing year-round.
Australia, for instance. And it becomes a large problem when you've got races scheduled all year. Where do you fit in the rest? And it becomes a huge issue. And I've got to sit people down and give them a call and say, I don't know what you want me to do with this. We need to figure something out because this is not going to be good for you. And sometimes there's sponsor obligations and you just got to eat it. Like, okay, we'll do what we can.
really manipulate your season towards, you know, getting some proper rest and some proper training in at some point, because that becomes, can become a limiter for a lot of people. Yeah, the ability to do that much work is, the ones that can tolerate it are like Wout Van Aert and Matthew Van Der Poel. And even for them, the wheels come off eventually. Wout would be winning more if he actually got more rest. Come on. He's still good at so many things.
My accusation against Wout is that he's just become Michael Matthews. Oh no! Oh come on, he's so much better than that! Oh yeah, he's outstanding, but he does come second place a lot. But that thing is, they are outliers of outliers of outliers in their ability to do a cross season and then go into classic season and then be fit for the Tour de France and do Worlds immediately after.
they get very little opportunity for rest in terms of their schedules and literally the only reason they can get away with that is because they are the two of the three best athletes in the world and you know we talked about Pogacar earlier like the wheels have firmly come off of him this week and that's you know there's no way you can do a cyclocross hold on I'm curious about Poggy because
Because he's been such a great one-day racer this year, and also, second in the tour, like, that's not bad, like, considering the gap that he had, the third, and how hard the parkour was for Worlds this year. I would actually argue that, you know, he's, you know, the wheels didn't come off the wagon. He was actually really fucking fit, like what he needed to be.
really fucking fit, but I think it was clear at the end of this race that he needs to break. Yeah, he definitely, I think anybody who races worlds on that course needs a fucking break right now. I don't know, Alison Jackson had a great time. Because she's the best, that's why. Okay, so next question is, oh, looking forward to this. Oh, thank you so much. We got that one. We got that one. Oh, peak power.
Okay, better endurance and repeatability, but I want to see that five seconds grow. Okay, so peak power. For most people, you need to be really, really, really fresh. Really fresh. I will give people a sprint test to assess freshness sometimes. Yeah, same. And that's because when, like, I think we mentioned this earlier.
When you're well-rested, your nervous system is all chill, like you're topped up, everything's back to normal, most people can have some really good sprint power. And a lot of people actually see some of their best ever five-second power after their mid-season break, when we start doing a round of testing and see where somebody's at. And it won't come back all year. And part of that is because, especially if you don't test it at the right points, but...
You can be just not fresh enough. And if that's something that you need in your races, and you want to see improvement, well, first of all, if your peak power has been stagnant, chances are you need to add some muscle mass. So get into the gym. So that's another limiter. But getting to the gym and being fresh, and actually that's a problem that some track sprinters have, is their training programs are so fatiguing that they cannot hit good numbers a lot of the time. And sometimes you don't need to hit.
Big Peak Power, but just having that top end is all about feeling fresh and strong and motivated. You can think back to the most recent Olympics, where Jason Kenney basically fumbles his lead up into it somehow, and ends up underwhelming in the sprints, and then it comes to that Kieran, and it's magical the way the legs came for one effort.
a lot of luck and an Australian who didn't really know what he should be doing. But, you know, his legs arrived at the correct moment and he had a gold medal winning performance. And it's largely because, you know, throughout the course of that Olympic week, he rode himself to the point where he got to the point where the legs were good. He didn't arrive. And actually, that is the other, like an edge case where I've seen
People have their best performances after a really, really intense sprint camp. And they'll do doubles, they'll do a billion starts, they'll do motor-paced efforts, they'll do everything, and they get their best efforts at the end of that week. And that is actually a rarity. Because normally, if you're going, okay, my goal event is on day one of Worlds or some shit like that, okay, cool, are we going to...
Slam your legs with training, so that way you're good in that first day, because by the time you get to that last day, you're over the hump and you're screwed. And, you know, kind of managing that kind of stuff is, honestly, it's very tricky. And it takes a lot of practice and individualization to get that kind of stuff right for peak power. But anyway, most people listening to this are not track sprinters, but a lot of the same principles can apply.
I've got a handful of clients, and I'm kind of one of them, where you've got to do a lot of sprint efforts to have a good sprint, to really feel that neural connection, and getting that motor pattern really bedded in can be very, very beneficial to having a good sprint power. But it's a rarity. It's certainly not the rule.
Yeah, if you don't spin your legs at 140 RPM, occasionally, you're not going to produce a good sprint at 140 RPM when it matters. Well, most people with gears choose not to sprint at 140 RPM. Okay, a couple more questions. Let's see. Fitness improves slowly, but performance can improve quickly. Maybe it just caught up. Actually...
Maybe I should have considered this one before I read it. Can you parse this one for me? Stipness improves slowly, but performance can improve quickly. Maybe it just caught up. I actually have a feeling that this person... Do you mean in the sense that they have the days where they feel really good, but they feel like they're not getting fitter?
Okay, I am looking at this person's profile right now, and there's a lot of Olympic lifting on this profile. And so I've got a couple suspicions here, because other sports have different language for what they're talking about than cycling. And first of all, that fascinates me all the time. I love watching people train in other sports. One of my favorites is actually javelin throwers and shot putters. So my favorite...
Training, I'll go for an hour scrolling people's Instagrams, like walking at the training going, oh my god, how does their lat not tear off their back? That's crazy. But so I think fitness meaning like aerobic fitness, but performance meaning like race results, possibly. And so because it's like, it's like if you're using your FTP to gauge your fitness, and it's not improving, but you start racing and you get better at racing, like you develop that kind of fitness.
Yeah, sure. That could be one way that this could happen. And so I would say, first, you want to expand your horizon for what counts as being fit. But I would also say, looking at the amount of weightlifting on this person's profile, one of the things that can be overdone is the cross-training for a lot of folks. Like, if you are in the gym three days a week doing legs,
and you're trying to ride your bike on top of that, something's going to give. You do not have  and it's not even  at this point, it's not even about the interference effect of like AMPK and mTOR and all that stuff and aerobic and building muscle and yada yada. It's not even close. This is about you are doing too much to recover and  Too much to recover from. Yeah. Thank you. I missed a preposition.
I'm in the gym squatting my recovery. Some people feel like that. And actually, in the gym, a lot of the time, too, some people have a skewed RPE. And sometimes it takes years to work your RPE in the gym. I've been lifting for a long time now. And when I squat, sometimes I've got to recalibrate, oh, this was a 7, this was a 6, this was an 8, this was a 9.
because the decoupling can happen rapidly. It's in a set while you're lifting. If I'm lifting and I haven't eaten enough that morning, I'll go in and I'll feel fine until I get to rep eight. And if I'm aiming for like 15, I'll get to 12 and I'll be like, normally this feels like a six or a seven and I should have three reps left. But right now I feel like I've got one rep left and I've got to rack this weight and get out of here and like go stop at a Wendy's on the way home or something. Just get food.
because at that point I'm making terrible food decisions too. You need to put the Ben and Jerry's entry into your own calendar. Yeah, I got to get them to keep Ben and Jerry's for me in the gym. That would be great. So yeah, I think that actually last time we recorded somebody else, it was a different person, had a lot of weightlifting in their profile. And I normally don't even look at people's profiles, but I wanted to kind of see what this person was about. And yeah, and it's, yeah.
You can get away with that kind of stuff briefly. A lot of people who start lifting, that neural drive that they get is so powerful. I'm one of those people. When I started lifting, I got so many more watts for my five-minute efforts and all that stuff. I was absolutely floored. I was like, this is great. It doesn't happen for everybody. I am one of the lucky few.
Yeah, don't base your training off of professional cyclists or professional cyclist coaches' own training. Because if you follow Coley, it might not go as you hope. If you follow me, you'll just be doing a lot of really weird random long rides. Yeah. Yeah, and I actually every once in a while I think about I should get myself a coach and then I realize I would be the worst person to get coached.
I'd be like, what is this supposed to do? Look at this paper, like, what about this? And I would, oh man, I would just be a pain in the ass. I don't want to put anybody through that. Yeah, if I didn't, like, have faith in Fabiano, like, the reason, like, the coaching with Fabiano really worked is he put in a plan that was like, yeah, I'd do that.
There was not, like, the amount of actual communication Fabiano and I actually had outside of Training Peaks workouts was pretty low. We'd check in every week, but I very rarely needed to go to him to say, you know, what are we doing? Because it made sense to me. Important note, though, that if you are not a cycling coach yourself, like, do have in mind, you know...
Why are you doing this? Yeah, and actually, we have a mutual friend in a Discord. I was chatting with him, and I asked him how it was going with his coach. And he said, well, he's not, you know, giving me anything that I don't already know. And I was like, you know, that's not the purpose of a coach. Like, it can be sometimes, for sure, if you're not well-versed in training methodologies and whatnot and planning and all that stuff. And that's fine. Sometimes it's just about being accountable.
and having an objective outside opinion. Because I saw somebody comment on a post, it might have been Reddit or something like that, about empirical cycling, and somebody was basically commenting like, oh yeah, I kind of knew all the stuff that they were given, and I feel like there's very little training insights in all of this. And I think my comment was like, yeah, I feel like 50% of my job.
is, or like 80% of my job is telling people to not go as hard. And then there's like 1% actual training insights. Because once you've got all the basics down, a lot of it's just nailing the basics. And not a lot of it is like big branding stuff. Like those kind of things come rarely where you go, oh, I've got the perfect thing. That is like a, that's like a unicorn. Yeah.
Alright, so Rory, thanks for coming on. Alright, thanks man, thanks for coming on. Really appreciate your time. And yeah, again, Rory does have open slots. I probably said all this in the intro and outro anyway, so you'll hear it again in just a second. But yeah, thanks everybody. Cheers. Alright, so I want to thank Rory again for coming on to the podcast and I hope everybody enjoyed listening to him. I always enjoy a chat with him.
And if you'd like to work with Rory or any of our other coaches here at Empirical Cycling, please reach out to empiricalcycling at gmail.com. We're negotiable for students and professional athletes. And if you'd like to consult with us, please reach out. We can help you review your files or plan for next year, you know, review this year or whatever's on your mind. We can talk biochem if you'd really like to. Well, you know, I'd really like to. Most people actually don't. So that's totally fine. If you want to ask a question on the podcast, follow me at Empirical Cycling. And if you want to donate, Empirical Cycling.
dot com slash donate, and again, yeah, if you want to reach out, if you just want to say thanks, or if you want to critique the podcast, or anything like that, yeah, just shoot me an email, empiricalcycling at gmail.com, and with that, we will see you all in the next episode, which I genuinely hope is a Wattstock, I'm almost done, and then we will have a couple
more pretty quick succession after that. So it's going to be really a lot of fun. So hang in there, everybody. The nerdy stuff is coming if that's what you're here for. And if you're not, well, bad news. All right. Thanks, everybody. Bye.